hey this is presto Walker reminding you
to mind your decisions a square with a
side length of one has an inscribed
semicircle along one of its sides as
shown the blue line starts at the
top-left corner of the square is tangent
to the semicircle and ends at the side
of the square what is the length of the
blue line I saw this problem on the blog
data genetics and I highly encourage you
check out the website for many
interesting problems pause the video if
you'd like to give this problem a try
and when you're ready keep watching to
learn how to solve this problem
[Music]
before I get to the solution I want to
mention a related problem how to solve
the shape-shifting triangle if you
haven't seen that video give it a watch
it's a very fun problem there's actually
a key principle in that video which I'm
going to quickly go over because it will
help us solve this problem the key
principle is that a pair of tangents
from outside a circle have equal lengths
in other words in this figure a B and a
C will have the same length how do we
prove that draw radii to the points of
tangency both of these will be tangent
so they'll be right angles and they'll
have the same length of the radius of
the circle now connect point a to the
center of the circle and denote that
distance as W since we have right
triangles we can solve for the remaining
leg a B will be the square root of W
squared minus R squared and AC will have
the same length
therefore a B and a C have equal lengths
and that's what we needed to show let's
use this principle to solve the problem
in this video we're going to construct
some external tangents to the semicircle
first consider the upper-left corner of
the square
this is tangent to the semicircle and
its length is the side of the square so
it's length will be 1 we also have one
more tangent to the semicircle and this
will have the same length of 1 by the
principle of equal tangents now we're
going to construct another set of equal
tangents notice that this line here and
this line here will both be external
changes to the semicircle therefore
they'll have the same length and we're
going to denote these distances as Y
since this portion of the side of the
square has a length of Y the remaining
portion of this side will be one minus y
because the entire side of the square is
equal to one the hypotenuse of this
right triangle will be one plus y so now
we can solve for y because we have
a right triangle and we're going to use
the distance formula one squared plus
the quantity one minus y squared is
equal to the quantity one plus y squared
we simplify this and we solve that y is
equal to 0.25 we simply substitute that
back in and that gives us our value of x
which is 1 point 2 5 and that's the
answer to this problem
so that was a fun problem and to end
this video I want to paraphrase Steve
Jobs you can't always see the importance
of math when you learn it you can only
see its value in hindsight you have to
trust your math teachers work hard and
it will make all the difference in your
life thanks for making mind your
decisions one of the best channels on
YouTube thanks for watching and thanks
for your support
[Music]